Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turboville. Join the Navy and see
the world. And indeed Lieutenant Commander Garland Bayless of College Station saw most
of it in his two-year service aboard auxiliary personnel 149, a troop transport ship during
World War II. It was a vessel built only as a transport and varied up to 3,000 from
one town or island to another. It took some back from war from home and some from home
into that. You know I messed that up when I was rehearsing it. I wrote it right. I just
can't say it. Sorry about that. That happens about three times a year. So congratulations
you were here for me. No you didn't. No no I messed my... Let me look at it and see. I
know I wrote it right. It's just awkward for me to see. I wrote it the way I meant to
read it. It's just that there's my eyes aren't. It was a vessel built only as a transport
and varied up to up to 3,000 from one town or island to another. It took some back home
from war and some from home into war. That's exactly what I wanted. It took some. Okay.
I'm going to read that. I got it tangled a little bit there. Okay. Sorry about that.
They need stuff for their Christmas party tape. That's why I did that. Okay.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turviville. Join the Navy and see
the world and indeed Lieutenant Commander Garland Bayless of College Station saw most of
it in his two-year service aboard Auxiliary Personnel 149. A troop transport ship
very World War II. It was a vessel built only as a transport and varied up to 3,000
from one town or island to another. It took some back home from war and some from home
into war. It was on the water both in the Pacific and Atlantic for two years and he traveled
some 125,000 nautical miles. In all Garland Bayless spent 30 years in the Navy and the reserves
and then later spent 34 years as a professor of history at Texas A&M. Please welcome
Garland Bayless to Veterans of the Valley. Garland is not to know you. I've known you
for some time and to have you here on Veterans of the Valley finally. Let's talk a little
bit about growing up. You grew up in McGee, Arkansas. That is correct. Southeast part of
the state. Talk about growing up in McGee. Well, McGee was a small country town about 3,000,
18 miles from Mississippi River, 40 miles north of Louisiana. Your railroad town is since
like the railroad family. Also cotton and corn. Rule. The country folks all came to town
on Saturday. I won't go into what is called Furnish Day. You probably never heard of
it. That's when the landowner's furnished their tenants with money to make the ensuing
crop. Got out of high school there. Started college in Monticello, Arkansas, then Arkansas
A&M, then University of Arkansas at Monticello. Very small school. Virtue no men left. 206
coastal artillery battery been activated and sent to Alaska. That left a ratio about
four women with every boy, which is pretty good. One of a deal. One of a deal. Want to go
back to your family? Your family was in the railroad business. Your dad was a conductor.
That's right. Two brothers were conductors. And two brothers were. And they were thus exempt
from the draft. Right. My two other brothers both drafted. One spent over four years overseas,
another three and a half years before they got home. Right. There was station one went from
North Africa to Sicily to Italy, into France and into Germany before the war was over.
Exactly. The other was station off the Persian Gulf in Basra, part of the Lin-Lise program
of the United States to Russia and reverse. Right. You went from Arkansas to, you talked
about the programs of E1 program that eventually became a V12 program. And it had to do with
education, how many semesters. And they talk about sort of how that worked and eventually
how that got you to Columbia University. Well, in November of 42, we all knew we're going
to do something. 18, debating in college storms, what to do. I said I'm going to the
United States and Garland Dose, you can't swim very well. North L1 being a fox over in the
Army. So in winter, little rock Arkansas in November 1942 joined what was called the Navy
of V1 program. The theory here that were theory was you would stay in that program to receive
your degree and then you go to offices, Canada's got a Navy achievement. To all progress,
the need to officers that cut that down to the V1 program. Arkansas, Monticello at Arkansas,
Monticello was one of those schools. So I put on a uniform along with guys who in the Marine
Corps, including Tom Chandler, who was in the Marine Corps that I didn't know Tom then,
I formed a head baseball coach. You know you were together until you got here. I got here,
that is correct. And so after a total of five semesters, we got three, got two, whatever,
I was sent to Columbia University in New York City to the Navy of Michigan School for a 90-day
program to convert me hopefully into a Naval officer. You talked about how a country boy from
New York, Arkansas going up to New York City, that was quite a culture shock. Very much. I'd been
in New Orleans once, in a little rock a lot of times. They were then small. So I go from there to
New York, like thousands and thousands of people pulled out of the farms or early areas in the cities
to different environments. And I walked to streets in New York, looking at tall buildings. First
time I had liberty, I got lost with the wrong place. I finally got back to Columbia University.
Right. And I was commissioned there in early October in 1944. Now when you left Columbia and came
back home on your way to the West Coast to be deployed, did you know at that time where you were
going to be assigned that you were assigned to a transport. Now we're heading our orders.
They already had your orders. And they gave me 10-day leave in route to California's Long Beach.
You pick up my ship. And that ship at that point in May, only one trip. And that was to Hawaii.
Right. They took 400 of various types of personnel there. We loaded in Long Beach a mixed group,
OSS, which was a precursor of the CIA, Red Cross personnel, and Army Muil Pack Outfit. We did not
have the Muil, we took him to Calcutta. They got their Muils. And then they had a Muil Pack
train across the Lido road from Indian to China. So they trained in Colorado, interesting,
interesting people. That's the one thing about your service and your deployment was that you
met all kinds of people in who you transported. Let's go back. You went home and you went to San Francisco.
Talk about Long Beach that time. Right. Long Beach. Talk about the vessel. It was named after a
General J. H. McCray, who I looked up and found out that he was a military man of the 1800s. I
don't know much more about his military either. But it was actually called the AP Auxiliary Personnel 149.
Talk a little bit about the ship. It was a large ship obviously because you were able to bring
aboard 3,000 plus a crew of how many? About 430. About 430. Talk about the ship. Was it pretty crowded?
Well, it was pretty crowded. As indicated in the earlier marks, it was built as a transport
in the Kaiser shipyards. It was not a conversion. So we were set up. We fed our, compliment our troops,
three meals a day. Many just got two. But we were so designed that we could turn it down. And we
knew how many were going to every compartment. Right. And so we loaded these troops. We would send
the top and count them down. One poor guy in Long Beach at my banning ship station came there
with his helmet liner. He was C. C. Every time I saw him. He always had his helmet liner. And those
you guys are in the Marine Corps know what the helmet liner is. And it had many uses. One was to
catch whatever you had. Exactly. He was throwing up in California. In the Calcutta. Right. We made
one stop in the route at Melbourne, Australia. It was 40 days and 40 nights. Right. They get from
California through Melbourne into Calcutta. I'm going to talk about that trip a little bit more
in a minute. But talk about what your, your job on the ship was just a little bit of everything.
It was one specific job. A junior officer reporting aboard the vessel then. A lot of OJT on the
job training. They take you aboard and you will spend three or four weeks of, can you,
aviation officer three or four weeks of the first lieutenant who was in charge of all the day,
three or four weeks for the navigation officer. And you made this circular around. I hired
I did not get that OJT on job training with the engineer and officer. I come back then just a
moment. And at the same time you're being trained as an officer day. You would call the J OOD
junior officer day. And that was three months training period. At the end of that you within
seven. Said to be an officer day. Now what that meant is remember that ship was 417 feet long,
78 feet on the beam and about 17,000 times. And so you had this crew of 400 plus, you were from
2,800, 3000 troops. And you're a sail in the ocean blue and you're responsible doing that four
hours you have the watch. And if you have any problem you call the skipper his cabin was just behind
the bridge. So that's what you trained to become officer of the day. And when you were off
to the day of the day. The skipper might be in taking a nap. You were in charge of the
whoever he was asleep. Whoever had the watch. Right. It was your responsibility. That's already
heavy for 20 year old boy. I bet it is. Yeah I want to talk about that more later. Your first trip
from California you said stopped in Melbourne to Calcutta. It was a little bit unique in that you
had a escort. You said you had a 10 can of destroyer. You had a munitionship an oiler. But
that didn't work out the way you wanted it. Well not exactly. We always steamed the loan except for
this. Right. The only time we were in a small convoy with escort. We had this all-strain destroyer
10 can. Just ahead of us we were in the center just behind. Porton Starborough was munitionship
in an order. So we were steaming long men and own business. Next thing was mid afternoon. We
see the destroyer throwing depth charge off the stern. He thought he had a submarine. How far
behind are you? Oh my goodness. Maybe a hundred yards. Okay. Yes. I have to think pretty for about
a hundred yards. Yeah. Yeah. That's tough enough. That's a soft pitching wedge. Yes.
So we had a veer of starboard and avoid the munitionship. Nothing happened but there was a
conversation between the two skippers. They were supposed to tell us before they dropped the
depth charges. Now had it been a jam summary now. We've been happy or Japanese summary. What
I'm supposed to say now. You would have liked to have known. So you wouldn't be on top of it.
That's right. So you had to do a little bit. If you was down here, he'd me have scared him off too.
So after that y'all decided you'd rather be alone. You can handle this by yourself.
Well we never go in the opportunity. Right. So we sail all over the Atlantic, the Indian,
the China Sea, wherever we went we were always alone except for that one time. Exactly. What
you do is zigzag. You have a panty starboard degree so on. What are it maybe? You talked about
the passengers on that first trip and you started to talk about that. OSS, Office of Strategic
Service, which is sort of pre-CIA. And Mule Pack out there out of Colorado, Red Cross,
and others. It was really a pulporeo. We had a few laps. That was okay. That was okay.
Well there's a story that I can't tell you. Not with me, some better. Better or not.
Out of Calcutta, you talked about how you had elements of the 20th Air Force that you were taking
to Tinian Island where they were going to stage for the bombing of Japan. So talk a little bit more
about that. Well that's right. We came into Calcutta of the Hubei River, which is a tributary of
the Ganges. Larger ship they'd ever seen to know how to tie us up. But finally got us tied up.
And we all floated the people that we had there. And there's still an army lieutenant looking for me
because while there he bought a suitcase, a cigarette lighter, and something else
that I spoke to his wife when I got back to the States. I never found the address. So he's
probably still a fuss at that sailor who took his goods. Not deliberately. But we get into Calcutta
but there are about three or four days. And then that's when we load elements of the 20th Air Force.
Three days, we started getting messages under wave from Tokyo Rose who was part of their
psychological warfare. We would be sent three days out of Calcutta. She knew the name of our
Skipper T.R. Cali, the name of the Colonel commanding the elements of the 20th, and where we'd be
in and where we were going. That makes you anxious to say the least. Exactly. And we were at
General Quarters, oh probably 24 to 36 hours. But nothing happened but that was part of it.
And she got our attention. It made us anxious. The psychological warfare.
The psychological warfare. Exactly. So you were expecting any time that it couldn't be.
Yeah, it was a legitimate threat. Did they know who you are and who you've been and who you're going?
That's right. So you had to be ready. And General Quarters for over a day, almost 24 hours.
Right. Right. At 10 a.m., you steam the empty to New Guinea. And talk about that. It was about
when you got to New Guinea, the people that you loaded on the time. We unloaded. I think there's
about 2,700 these. All these soldiers and nurses had been in New Guinea anywhere. We understood
from 24 to 28 some 36 months. I can't be exact. I'm going on the stories they told us.
Right. And they're all over Yellow from Taken, Adderbrim. Many had jungle rods at fungal
that you pick up. I was only at three days. I managed to get on my right foot, took years,
ever get rid of it. But we loaded these folks aboard. Many were in pretty bad shape. We had
this one soldier. He would sit, put his head back into bulkhead and look at the other one.
And we called the bulkhead stayer. He just sat there and looked at nothing except another steel bulkhead.
We had one army nurse who had apparently having psychological problems. She had jungle rod very badly.
It could not keep close. We had improvising padded chill. A place for her. Then we had one soldier to die.
None of us had how to conduct a barrel at sea. So we broke out the manual. The carpenter made the
wooden rack. We sold him in canvas, put shells and other weights in there. The chaplain said
the appropriate words. And as you're seeing the movies, we dumped him into the sea.
We didn't want to do that very often. That was the only time that that happened.
We did not have the silics to keep the body. Exactly. You talked about this was in the beginning
where they had been actually ending at about 27-28 months. Something like that. You talked about the
burial at sea. Talk a little bit more about the boat itself. You said it was a crowded situation.
Was it one of the boats where you always had to duck around and bump ahead a lot of places?
You're always bumping your head. I had to hit my head. I had to hit my head.
But no, it was for the troops. It's especially crowded. We gave them freedom beyond
topside anytime they wanted to. Of course, we always had to alert them when your topside
at dark do not strike a match to light your cigarette. You can see a struck match in the
butt of that cigarette. About 14-16 miles. It's where the earth's curvature is such that it's
no longer visible. But that's an open signal for anybody who may be out there who might want to
take a shot at you. Now, our guys learned pretty quickly. Later, I mentioned the Australian troops.
Right. Now go ahead and do that. You liked the Australia. You gave a lot of respect to them in
their country. No, we and all of that. But sometimes you had to. Well, we went into towns of
Australia. This is our second visit to Australia. We loaded again about 2,820, 150 Australian troops.
As they came aboard, I was standing at the head of the gang, we leading down to a compartment
held a hundred and two soldiers. Soon the word came up. Sir, there are no more bugs. I know
they're bugs. So I went down. They were throwing the gear on one bump, got themselves the other.
So I'm sorry guys. You only get one bug. So we worked that out. But there were very pleasant people.
I like both Melbourne a great deal and Townsville a great deal. And the people we met interacted with.
Now, just before we got into Townsville, we pushed our crew to chip and paint the deck.
And you say, there knows what that means. You get on your deck, you chip all the loose paint,
and you repaint it. Well, you want this shit with the trial Australian friends. So they come
aboard with their hobnail boots. As I understand it, all soldiers in the British Empire were hobnails.
And literally, if you look upside down, the whole bottom has a little nail head. It was for traction.
Great if you need it. But in a couple days, you cannot find any paint on our deck. And our
sailors not very, very happy. All their work had gone to naught. They'd worked hard on that day.
You said that you were, we took those to Timor, T-I-M-O-R, for the Dutch East Indies.
I see. You said that you never came under attack in those two years.
Looking back, is that somewhat surprising considering that you were a true transport?
And you would think from the enemy standpoint that that would be a prime target.
You would think so. You would especially talk to your rosy who we were, what we were doing.
But occasionally we had sightings of what appeared to be periscopes. But no one ever bothers
when you were shot in angered anybody. And we're always thankful. Because honestly,
when you're steaming the enemy of water with this Japanese or German, it worries you.
Goes can always happen. And on our board, we had two five-inch-thirty-eighths,
which are our main armament. We had 20 millimeters and 40 millimeters anti-aircraft.
We've practiced a lot, but we never shot it angered.
You mentioned when the Philippines to take back to the States before going to Europe via the
Panama Canal. Let's get you over to the Atlantic after we look at some photographs.
We've got some pictures that you have supplied us. And there is a young
instant garland bailiff, I guess. You're not held where you think about it.
Twenty.
Twenty? Great hair.
Great hair, thank you.
Yeah, you bet. You bet.
There's your ship.
That's the mighty Mac, the terror that Pacific.
There it is. The general J.H. McCray.
Now, if you're one of the people in that nature.
I'm one facing you.
One facing you.
With my hands on my hips, I'm not sure if I.
Yeah.
I think we were tied up there in Manas Island in the US.
That is somewhere in the Atlantic.
Was that a post picture?
It was post.
That's what I was thinking.
Are you just sitting there just looking at a whole lot of water?
No, I just want to sit over the water.
Hey, said, yeah, it looks like it looks like it can be used for recruiting poster.
I found this and I'm glad you did.
And that's sort of a sketch of the same.
See, if you look at it, the anchors not there yet.
Right.
Right. The US general J.H. McCray.
And now, this is a Columbia, right?
Columbia University in Midshipman's Coast.
And there's the Corps of Midshipman in Parade right there.
I want you to see every man there had a hat on.
That was 1944.
It was all military.
It was our last picture.
And like I say, that looks like a picture that could be on the Navy recruiting poster right there.
That's a good looking sailor.
Well, thank you.
Boy, the white teeth and everything.
That's a...
And hair.
And hair?
But you got some dates from that picture.
You hadn't met Mary yet.
Oh, I can say that.
No, no, no.
They never hurt.
We were talking about at...
Now, I'm sorry, that picture we saw before was at Columbia or the Citadel.
That was at Columbia.
No.
The other one was after I left Columbia because I already...
I'd already been to Pacific.
Right.
And I was back home on leave.
Okay.
The one in the sailor outfit was just before I started midshipman's school.
The picture of the review that we just looked at.
That was in September 1944.
Okay.
In Columbia University.
That Columbia University.
Okay.
Because we're going to get on later talking about the Citadel after later on.
From the Pacific to the Atlantic through the Panama Canal
and you went to...
You landed at La Harfrant where again, the same job you picked up troops to come back to the states
and wherever they needed to go.
We took them back this time to Norfolk.
The Atlantic Ocean was a little bit more of a challenge than the...
You had some...
Obviously, some challenges in the Pacific as far as the weather
and the currents and the waves and the storms and all that.
But the Atlantic was particularly mean, right?
Well, you know...
One thing, it's a smaller body of water.
The storms can be bad in either.
Right.
But I think it was on that trail.
No, it was on the New York.
I guess you're asking about that heavy storm.
Right.
Yes, sir.
In a normal steaming, we would do about 424 Nautical Mounds in 24 hours.
That's 10 or 12 miles.
Yeah, right.
Then this one in particular storm in the North Atlantic is best we could figure.
We may have made 11 Nautical Mounds forward.
In those seas, all you can do is keep your balance to the sea
that is where the waves are coming to you.
If you ever fall off, then that wave hit you broadside
and you're going to have to go over.
Right.
Almost like rogue waves.
Yeah.
I think it was on the one in the Pacific.
We had a sailor stand in there to watch our attack, not attack common.
It's a device.
It's a big thing with an era.
As it goes to your right from the starboard,
it would get down it with shutter and shutter and shutter.
Then it would come back and shutter.
And if you went beyond a certain point, you kept going.
And one of the things we could have done about it, if it happened.
Right.
What you're saying, you're watching it.
And especially if you're the OD, it helps the day.
If that thing turned on, you're watching.
It's bad scene.
Exactly.
You talked about some of the waves were hitting at 140 feet
because they were coming over the side.
Right.
Tumptum.
From the bow.
The form is 144 feet tall.
Right.
As we're hitting to see the waves broke all the way over.
I better keep my hands down.
That's okay.
My life will get me.
You had an assignment to take some elements of the night
from your back to the Pacific for the staging of the groundwork.
Yeah.
That was from Marseille.
Right.
But while you were in the Atlantic, you got word
that the bomb had been dropped in Japan and that the war was.
Was over in Japan and you were in the right place for that.
I don't know about that.
Well, we all loaded these troops to take them
back through the Panama
to probably the Philippines.
We were unclear on that.
Right.
For staging to invade Japan.
The war was over in Japan and someone that
Pentagon made the decision that all those ships
transporting troops that had already transit
passed through the Panama would continue to their destination.
Those who had not us, we were diverted to New York City
and talk about happy people.
When we passed the word,
that ship brought not from seas,
but from happy soldiers.
That's right.
And I don't blame them.
And they broke out all sorts of stuff you drink.
I don't know what it was.
Or where they had it.
Because they all of a sudden their course just changed to New York City
instead of going to get ready.
To invade Japan.
For a ground war.
Yeah.
No wonder that they were happy.
You were actually on the ship until 1946.
We'll be long after the war because there was a lot more
transporting to be done.
To bring people back.
On one of the trips through the Suez,
we went both to what is now Pakistan
and what is badger if we should read about a lot
in our war in Iraq.
Up to Persian Gulf to pick up troops.
I started talking to guys, you know Jim Baylor-Syes.
That was my brother who I'm not seeing for over three years.
And he had left Badgers for three weeks before I got there.
Otherwise I would have had the chance to bring him home.
But I did not.
We're running short on time.
So you finished in in in in 46, like I say in the summer of 1946
is when you got off off the ship.
And you enrolled came back you enrolled in Arkansas at Fayetteville
in the fall of 46.
Started business administration.
You like me didn't thank very too much of accounting
and taking staff.
Well they didn't think much of me.
We used to call it then running play with BBA.
They both drove me crazy.
So I went back to the sciences.
I started as a pre-made.
Right.
And got my back from Swalajian chemistry.
It's all year in the fall.
Talk of excuse.
Dermot Arkansas.
The most orange takes it.
Seventh grade.
You know, seven through twelve.
Yeah, you said that's when you lost your year.
Seven different preparations every day.
And then the orange work for DuPont.
That's where Mary and I met.
I decided to go to graduate school
in the University of Texas in history.
You're in Mary.
Big switch.
We're married in 1950.
You bet you switched from the sciences from business
administration to the sciences to history.
And that took you to the citadel for one year.
When it was a great experience.
Your first son David was born there in the citadel.
And but you were there for only one year.
And you had heard about Texas A&M
from a professor that you had worked with at the University of Texas.
Yes.
Ralph Steen, who's head of department at A&M,
was a visiting property UT.
Right.
Not having class got to knowing.
He called me once I got to the citadel.
And in 55, the legislature passed the law requiring all graduates.
A public universe have six hours of American history.
Six hours of polysci or government.
What did he want to call it?
He called me and said, they give me special money to hire five people.
If you ever think you're coming, it's now.
So I did.
Regrated leaving after only one year at the citadel.
But I did not think I could pass up the opportunity.
You talked about how at the citadel, it was all military.
Oh, no.
You yourself were in uniform as you taught classes there.
But then you came to A&M in 1956 and spent 34 years
in the history department.
We could do a whole other show just on your time at A&M.
So A&M, but that was during a time.
I know you knew General Rutter quite well as a fellow military men.
I had his order in class.
When you came, Bear Bryant was the head football coach.
And so 34 years at Texas A&M and retired in 1986 from full time, 1919.
1990.
The second time.
For real.
Right.
That four years I told each fall semester during the football season.
It's part time.
We're out of time.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
He enjoyed doing it.
It was fun.
Enjoyed it.
Garland Bayless and his wife, Mary, were married in 1950.
And they have three sons, David, Fred, and Mark, and eight grandchildren.
He speaks proudly of his opportunity to serve 30 years as a sailor.
And we honor him and salute him for that service.
I'm Tom Turbivill.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Thank you.